Deepfake post (#99)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2020-08-18-deepfake/deepfake.Rmd

.colab-root {
    display: inline-block;
    background: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.75);
    padding: 4px 8px;
    border-radius: 4px;
    font-size: 11px!important;
    text-decoration: none;
    color: #aaa;
    border: none;
    font-weight: 300;
    border: solid 1px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.08);
    border-bottom-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.15);
    text-transform: uppercase;
    line-height: 16px;
}
span.colab-span {
    background-image: url(https://distill.pub/2020/growing-ca/images/colab.svg);
    background-repeat: no-repeat;
    background-size: 20px;
    background-position-y: 2px;
    display: inline-block;
    padding-left: 24px;
    border-radius: 4px;
    text-decoration: none;
}
</style>

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = FALSE)
```

## Introduction

Working with video datasets, particularly with respect to detection of AI-based fake objects, is very challenging due to proper frame selection and face detection. To approach this challenge from R, one can make use of capabilities offered by OpenCV, `magick`, and `keras`.

Our approach consists of the following consequent steps:

- read all the videos
- capture and extract images from the videos

> - detect faces from the exracted images

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- detect faces from the extracted images
```

- crop the faces
- build an image classification model with Keras

> OpenCV is a computer vision library that includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's quickly introduce the non-deep-learning libraries we're using. OpenCV is a computer vision library that includes:
```

- Facial recognition technology
- [Motion tracking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Video_tracking)
- [Augmented reality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augmented_reality)

> - etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- and more.
```

On the other hand, `magick` is the open-source image-processing library that will help to read and extract useful features from video datasets:

- Read video files

> - Extracts images per second of video

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Extract images per second from the video
```

The videos in the folders are in the format of _mp4_ and have various lengths. Our task is to determine the number of images to capture per second of a video. We usually took 1-3 fps for every video.

> Note: Set fps to NULL if you want to extract all frames.

```{r eval=F, echo=T}
video = magick::image_read_video("aagfhgtpmv.mp4",fps = 2)
vid_1 = video[[1]]
vid_1 = magick::image_read(vid_1) %>% image_resize('1000x1000')
```

<center>

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE, layout="l-body", fig.cap = "[Deepfake detection challenge](https://www.kaggle.com/c/deepfake-detection-challenge/data)"}
knitr::include_graphics("files/frame_1.jpg")
```

</center>

We saw just the first frame. What about the rest of them?

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE, layout="l-body", fig.cap = "[Deepfake detection challenge](https://www.kaggle.com/c/deepfake-detection-challenge/data)"}
knitr::include_graphics("files/self.gif")
```

Looking at the gif one can observe that some fakes are very easy to differentiate, but a small fraction looks pretty realistic. This is another challenge during data preparation.

## Face detection

We can read all the files or take a sample. And afterward, detect and extract faces. 

> There is a very well-known library OpenCV^[[Opencv](https://opencv.org/)] which is designed for computer vision tasks. R has also some bindings to OpenCV, so extracting faces will not be a challenge for us.

Reviewer: I think with the introduction of OpenCV you've added, this paragraph can be deleted now

> At first, face locations need to be determined via bounding boxes with Opencv and then with magick library automatically extracted from all of the images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At first, face locations need to be determined via bounding boxes, using OpenCV. Then, magick is used to  automatically extract them from all images.
```

  shear_range = 0.2,
  zoom_range = 0.2,
  horizontal_flip = TRUE,
  fill_mode = "nearest",
  validation_split=0.2
)

train_generator <- flow_images_from_directory(
  train_dir,                  
  train_datagen,             
  target_size = c(width,height), 
  batch_size = 10,
  class_mode = "binary"
)

# Build the model ---------------------------------------------------------

conv_base <- application_vgg16(
  weights = "imagenet",
  include_top = FALSE,
  input_shape = c(width, height, 3)
)

model <- keras_model_sequential() %>% 
  conv_base %>% 
  layer_flatten() %>% 
  layer_dense(units = 256, activation = "relu") %>% 
  layer_dense(units = 1, activation = "sigmoid")

model %>% compile(
  loss = "binary_crossentropy",
  optimizer = optimizer_rmsprop(lr = 2e-5),
  metrics = c("accuracy")
)

history <- model %>% fit_generator(
  train_generator,
  steps_per_epoch = ceiling(train_generator$samples/train_generator$batch_size),
  epochs = 10
)
```
 
<center>

<br><br> <a href="https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1Wf9aTdcC_YtigjQIYcG8zJqq2q_vpZR9?usp=sharing" class="colab-root">Reproduce in a <span class="colab-span">Notebook</span></a>

</center>

## Conclusion

> This post shows how the R community can work with video data and bring a solution to video classification task:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This post shows how to do video classification from R. The steps were:
```

- Read videos and extract images from the dataset
- Apply OpenCV to detect faces
- Extract faces via bounding boxes
- Build a deep learning model 

However, readers should know that the implementation of the following steps may drastically improve model performance:

> - extract of all of the frames from video files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- extract all of the frames from the video files
```

> - upload different pre-trained weights from Keras library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- load different pre-trained weights, or use different pre-trained models
```

> - use another technology to detect faces -- ["MTCNN face detector"](https://github.com/ipazc/mtcnn)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- use another technology to detect faces -- e.g., ["MTCNN face detector"](https://github.com/ipazc/mtcnn)
```

> Feel free to try these options on the Deepfake detection challenge and share your results in the comment section!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel free to try these options on the Deepfake detection challenge and share your results in the comments section!
```
